Add discovery and cluster formation topic (#11416)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/voting-configuration.md

---
layout: default
title: Voting configuration management
parent: Discovery and cluster formation
nav_order: 30
---

# Voting configuration management

Every OpenSearch cluster maintains a voting configuration, which defines the set of cluster-manager-eligible nodes whose responses count when making critical cluster decisions. Understanding how OpenSearch manages voting configurations is essential for maintaining cluster stability and availability.

The _voting configuration_ is the authoritative list of cluster-manager-eligible nodes that participate in:

> - **Cluster manager elections** - Choosing which node leads the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cluster manager elections**: Choosing which node leads the cluster.
```

> - **Cluster state updates** - Approving changes to cluster metadata and shard allocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cluster state updates**: Approving changes to cluster metadata and shard allocation.
```

> - **Critical cluster decisions** - Any operation requiring cluster-wide consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Critical cluster decisions**: Any operation requiring cluster-wide consensus.
```

To prevent this, OpenSearch automatically excludes one node from the voting configuration, creating an odd number of voting nodes (for example, three out of four eligible). This adjustment ensures that one partition can maintain a majority and continue operating while the other cannot. As a result, OpenSearch improves resilience against split-brain conditions without reducing overall fault tolerance.

## Bootstrap configuration for new clusters

When starting a brand-new cluster for the very first time, OpenSearch requires an initial bootstrap configuration to determine which nodes should participate in the first cluster manager election. This bootstrap process establishes the initial voting configuration that the cluster will use.

> The bootstrap configuration is only required for new clusters and is ignored once the cluster has been successfully started. After the initial bootstrap, OpenSearch automatically manages the voting configuration as described in the sections above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bootstrap configuration is only required for new clusters and is ignored once the cluster has been successfully started. After the initial bootstrap, OpenSearch automatically manages the voting configuration as described in the previous sections.
```

> For complete details on configuring cluster bootstrapping, including setup procedures, requirements, troubleshooting, and examples, see [Cluster bootstrapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/bootstrapping/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complete information about configuring cluster bootstrapping, including setup procedures, requirements, troubleshooting, and examples, see [Cluster bootstrapping]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/bootstrapping/).
```

## Monitoring voting configuration changes

> To track voting configuration changes and check cluster formation status, use the monitoring commands detailed in the [Discovery and cluster formation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/#monitoring-discovery-and-cluster-formation) overview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To track voting configuration changes and check cluster formation status, use the monitoring commands detailed in [Discovery and cluster formation]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/#monitoring-discovery-and-cluster-formation).
```

## Related documentation

- [Voting and quorums]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/voting-quorums/): Understanding quorum-based decision making

> - [Discovery and cluster formation settings]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/settings/): Configure voting behavior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Discovery and cluster formation settings]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/tuning-your-cluster/discovery-cluster-formation/settings/): Configuring voting behavior
```
